---
layout: single
title: "Wilt: Rule Changes, The Palestra, NBA Negotations"
categories: book_post 
---

I think there’s a popular conception of the Internet as the richest platform for media consumption. This isn’t without reason. After all, rarely is an Internet webpage a flat piece of content - instead, the user is often funneled into a deep, seemingly endless web of storylines and research simply by exploring the page’s links. I try to read actual books with a similar perspective. Granted, the ease of surfing is compromised without clickable URLs and only dried ink. But the links are still there—approaching the content of my books not as static chunks of information but as portals to explore ideas in more detail after putting them back on my shelf has been rewarding. 

*Wilt: Larger than Life* is an incisive, informative, and purely well-written chronicle of the life and times of the enigmatic Wilt Chamberlain. Robert Cherry is an endearing author who tells Wilt’s story with integrity, highlighting his uncanny athletic ability and exuberant personality but also acknowledging Wilt’s deep-seated insecurities about his height and debatable shortcomings as a competitor.  

Reading Cherry’s piece on Wilt Chamberlain, I was struck by a few ideas that I now want to dive into:

1. With Jason Hehir’s *The Last Dance* documentary on Michael Jordan and the 1990s Chicago Bulls, the topic of “changing the game” of basketball has been of interest to basketball minds everywhere, and I want to use the book as a lens with which to argue that nobody *changed the game* like Wilt did. It is crucial to note that this proposition is distinct from the claim that nobody *played basketball* as well as Wilt, or nobody was *a greater winner* than Wilt. It proposes exactly what it reads: nobody changed the game like Wilt Chamberlain. When this proposition is taken for what it is, and nothing more, it isn’t terribly controversial. 

2. As a student at the University of Pennsylvania, Cherry reminded me how lucky I am to share a campus with the Palestra. This book showed me that while the Palestra is surely the Cathedral of College Basketball, it’s much more than that - it was home to some of Wilt’s best games, and I want to find out what other basketball legends loved playing in the stadium the Penn Quakers call home. 

3. In giving the reader a glimpse into Wilt’s contractual negotiations with NBA management, Cherry mentions the “option clause” - a contractual concept that tied players down to owners that has since been removed from NBA contracts. What really was this “option clause”, and how has sports business changed for stars since Wilt was in his prime? Especially in an era where players seem to have the ultimate control in free agency, it’s fascinating to track the evolution of the player-agent-owner triangle. 

## Changing the Game

What does it mean to “change the game” of basketball? One who “changes” the game leaves the state of it most permanently altered from the time he/she entered it to the time he/she left it. Note that the “it” we refer to here is not the sneaker industry and is not the average salaries of top players. The “it” we refer to is simply the game of basketball as practiced by the National Basketball Association. 

Before Wilt Chamberlain entered the NBA, it can be argued that abnormal size and athletic ability was a much more acurrate predictor of success in the league. This is evident when it comes to free throws, an underrated and crucial component of a successful basketball team. If you’re not convinced of the importance of consistently hitting from the line, recall my hometown Memphis Tigers squandering a nine-point lead to none other than Wilt’s alma mater, Kansas, in the 2008 NCAA National Championship game. 


{% include youtube_embed.html id="rJvLwSf0Xi8" %}




See, Wilt was a Division-I level track star and had ridiculous leaping abilities. So why bother perfecting his technique from the line? Instead, Wilt would take one step, throw the ball hard off the backboard, gallop all the way from the line and lay the ball in smoothly with his hand at the rim or just dunk it ferociously. This uncanny ability violated the spirit of the free throw shot but broke no technical rules, and the NBA didn’t know what to do. As they tended to do with Wilt, in 1956 the NBA instituted a new rule prohibiting one's feet to cross the upward plane of the free throw line until the ball hit the rim or went through the net. 

Today, a marquee measure of a coach is the effectiveness of his out-of-bounds plays. Can you get a quick open jumper taking the ball out of bounds? Backdoor picks, cuts through the lane - no shortage of strategy is employed in drawing a play to get a clean look at the basket taking the ball out of bounds. Not with Wilt. His 7’ 1’’ frame and ridiculous athletic ability lent itself to an infallible out-of-bounds play: lob it over the backboard and let Wilt go to work. He dunked it every time. Again, the NBA modified the rulebook to prevent Wilt’s teams from having an unfair advantage. 

While defensive goaltending had been against the rules for a while, there was no concept of offensive goaltending until Wilt came along and used his height to guide his teammates’ missed baskets into the hoop. The new rule stated that no player can interfere with the basketball when it’s on or above the cylinder, and the game’s never been the same since. Imagine the increased value of players like Dwight Howard and Yao Ming had Wilt not altered the boundaries of the NBA game. Granted, you might respond that these rules would have been instituted with or without Wilt, as soon as someone of his height and athleticism came along - however, one may argue that no player in today’s game or since Wilt had his combination of size and agility necessary for the level of dominance that provokes a rule change. 

Finally, one of the only things stopping Wilt from camping out in the lane was the three-second violation. If a player stays inside the boundaries of the lane for three seconds, a turnover results for his team. But *Wilt’s* lane stretched further than these boundaries. In other words, Wilt could camp right outside of the lane for however long he wanted without incurring a three-second violation while still using his athletic ability and reach to remain as effective as he would be inside the actual boundaries of the lane. So other teams had only one response -- they appealed to the NBA to widen the lane to increase the penalizable three-second area. And they did, from twelve to sixteen. That’s a thirty-three percent increase in lane width, solely due to Wilt. 

There have been players who have changed basketball as we know it - Kareem introduced the skyhook, Shaquille O’Neal made it common practice for poor free throw shooters to be intentionally fouled in the middle of the game, Jordan won championships and popularized enormous shoe deals for athletes, and Stephen Curry revolutionized the off-the-dribble three pointer, rendering big men and midrange jumpers nearly obsolete in today’s game. But I struggle to find another basketball player whose dominance and sheer athletic ability resulted in an upheaval of the rules—the very foundation through which the game is played and strategy is formed—to the point that an NBA game pre-Wilt is almost unrecognizable from post-Wilt (imagine watching a game today where free throws are dunked, the lane is much almost half as wide, out-of-bounds plays are just lobs to LeBron over the backboard, and offensive players can grab the ball from the rim and dunk it back). 

## The Palestra

The Palestra’s rich history as a basketball stadium dates back to when the Big Five of Philadelphia—Penn La Salle, St. Joseph’s, Temple, and Villanova—all called it home. I always knew the oft-cited fact that the Palestra has hosted the most college basketball games of any stadium in the country. But I didn’t truly understand the Palestra’s basketball history and meaning beyond the college game, especially for a Philadelphia kid like Wilt Chamberlain. 

It’s 1967, and the Philadelphia 76ers are playing the Boston Celtics in the Eastern Conference Finals to earn a ticket to the NBA championship. This isn’t, like, Ben Simmons vs. Jayson Tatum (with all due respect to two great players). This is Wilt Chamberlain lacing up against Bill Russell: one of the best individual athletes of all time against arguably the greatest winner of all time. And they’re playing Game 1 at the “venerable Palestra”, on the campus of the University of Pennsylvania (Cherry 173). Wilt had a fine game, I guess. 24 points, 32 rebounds, 13 assists, and 12 blocks. A quadruple-double against Bill Russell as the Sixers win the first game of the series. 

But it wasn’t Wilt’s first time playing at the Palestra, nor was this an unfamiliar experience for his talented teammate Wali Jones. Jones had been a standout guard at Villanova, winning BIG-5 Player of the Year honors twice and winning third-team All-American honors in his senior season. He won the MVP in a city championship game at the Palestra back in high school before leading an illustrious NBA career that included All-Rookie honors in 1964. 

Perhaps Wilt’s quadruple-double that game was inspired by his memories of dropping 35 points in the 1955 Philadelphia city-championship at the Palestra, where he dominated despite being quadruple-teamed by West Catholic High School players. In fact, Chamberlain had this career night playing for Overbrook High School, the same school Wali Jones would attend a few years later. 

To get a sense of just how much the Palestra has stood the test of time, flash forward 41 years from Wilt’s city championship at the Palestra, and another legend laces up on the same court: Kobe Bryant calmly drops 29 points as Lower Merion High School upsets Coatesville in the Philly District 1 High School Semifinals. At the time, Kobe’s father was an assistant coach for the local La Salle Explorers, and the La Salle fans at the game salivated over the possibility of Kobe lacing up in blue and gold the following year. That never happened. Kobe went straight to the NBA, won five championships, and became one of the greatest NBA players of all time alongside Wilt. 

The floor of the Palestra just has the feel of the greats. Wilt, Kobe, Jerry West, Oscar Robertson - they’ve all come to Penn’s campus to play. As a Penn student, this history is something truly special to me, and Robert Cherry brings it alive in this biography. 

## Negotiation and the Option Clause

Wilt may have played basketball on the hardwood, but he played a much different game off of it: the game of negotiation. Often, those who Wilt negotiated with were his closest friends. Cherry describes some of the wealthy statesmen that Wilt became very close to throughout his lifetime, including [Catskills hotelier and resort owner Mitch Kutsher](https://www.nytimes.com/1998/11/22/nyregion/milton-kutsher-catskills-hotelier-dies-at-82.html), one of Wilt’s first employers and a trusting friend. Further, Wilt’s first NBA contract was arranged by Ike Richman, owner of the Philadelphia Warriors and someone Wilt called “a second father”. When Richman died in 1965, Wilt’s future with the 76ers immediately started looking bleak, especially because it was well-known that Wilt wanted to travel across the world touring with the Harlem Globetrotters after a few years in the NBA. Ike Richman’s death left his former high school classmate and business partner Irv Kosloff in charge, who had a much weaker relationship with Wilt. 

Adding to the tensions between Kosloff and Wilt was Wilt’s claim that Ike Richman had promised him 25 percent of the 76ers, a claim that Kosloff disputed until the day he died. With no documentation to prove Richman’s promise, Wilt never got 25 percent of anything. 

Kosloff, though, did have something: leverage as an owner. The option clause, a statement in most player contracts back in Wilt’s day, tied NBA players to their teams in perpetuity or until ownership decided that they were done with them. The option clause was fairly common in NBA contracts in the mid-twentieth century, but was ultimately wiped out in 1976. Sometimes called the "reserve clause", Wilt's contractual situation was a far cry from the plight of modern NBA players, who come and go from their teams at a whim and sometimes even decide to make a television program out of it. In fact, the option clause meant there was no “free agency” at all in the sense that we know it today. 

{% include youtube_embed.html id="RTeCc8jy7FI" %}




Well, until Rick Barry came along. Barry, the only player in history to lead the NCAA, ABA, and NBA in season scoring and known for his unorthodox free throw shooting, challenged the reserve clause in court in 1967 before anyone else stood up to it. Perhaps because Barry isn't remembered as the nicest guy to play the game, people often overlook his role in changing the nature of NBA negotiations. As Bill Simmons writes in his *The Big Book of Basketball*, 

> Baseball player Curt Flood gets credit for standing up to The Man and paving the way for a new era of sports contracts, only Barry did the same two years earlier. So why doesn’t he get the credit? Because Rick Barry was a dick.

{% include youtube_embed.html id="XZUGiOoH8rU" %}




Remember the NBA in 2010? LeBron was on the Cavs, Kevin Durant was on the Thunder, Bosh was a Raptor, ... what happened? Sure, it’s debatable whether the trend of NBA players teaming up and becoming more mobile across teams started with KG and Ray Allen coming to Boston or whether LeBron is responsible for that shift with The Decision. Either way, none of these players would have the opportunity to make these moves if it weren’t for stars like Chamberlain and Barry, who were *chained* agents in their contracts instead of free ones. As we enjoy professional sports today, it's important to remember their contributions to the game’s evolution off of the court as much as on it. 